---
layout: post
title:  "Immortals go extinct"
permalink: immortals-go-extinct/
categories: life
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
author: Mahdi
---

We are all going to die, we all know that well.<br /><br /> Now I want to take
you to a world of immortals where humans don't die, they live and live and live
and... you know, live. From now on, pretend I'm a human on this world of
immortals, I'm immortal bitches.

![immortals chatting](/img/immortals.jpg) {% include caption.html text='There is
no campfire because they don\'t need it' %}

<!--more--> ---

In this world, there is no excitement in jumping from a cliff or doing flips
over walls or pretending to be a bird or even loving each other, in general,
there is no excitement in any experience, because there is nothing to miss if I
don't do that right now, I will always have another chance to do that again,
even if that's going to be a thousand years from now, because you know, we're
all good at waiting here.

There is no technology and no fast transportation system here, because, hell,
who gives a fuck about fast transportation systems.

Who gives a shit about tools to harvest more food, or something you can write
with, you can know about our meaningless past as much as you want, there are
always people to tell you about that.

Who cares if 2 + 2 = 4 or 5, I'm not going to die if the non-existing plane
crashes because of an error, none of that is needed.

We have an infinite amount of time to explore the globe, but we don't, because
there is no fun in doing that, how is that, you might ask. Someone from your
world told me I should explain it this way:

> Simple mathematics we know says, in an infinite timespan, no other timespan is
significant, basically, any number divided by infinity yields zero. Your
neighbour could tell you about how he spent a thousand years exploring Earth,
eating bugs and trying different methods to kill himself, and you could tell him
he literally spent 0% of his life doing all that, same as you, who just stood
there. > > ![any fucking number / infinity = 0](/img/division-by-infinity.jpg)

Now I don't understand much of that, but I had enough time, and nothing else to
do, to repeat this to myself since he told me that until now.

Here, in this world, we can't suicide, if that was an option, we know well that
we would go extinct soon after finding out the fact that we are immortals, we
really don't like this numb life.

---

_Pooof_

Alright I'm back. You see, we need death, we really do, without death our lives
would be meaningless, we would have no purpose. Okay we would probably still
[contribute to increase of entropy of the
universe](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxTnqKuNygE), but that's not what we
_want_ to be here for, we want a higher purpose in life, and it's death that
gifts us this higher purpose.

When I was a kid, I was told that in order to stay alive after death, you have
to submit your name on this planet, and in this universe if possible. I know,
that might sound ridiculous, but aren't we all fighting for the same thing, but
in our own ways? Maybe you just want to be remembered between a specific group
of people (and that's perfectly fine) or you might actually want to become a
global role model, like Gandhi, Albert Einstein and people alike, it doesn't
matter, what matters is, we all want to be remembered for what we've done in our
way to the end.

Immortals go extinct, but mortals find a mission to accomplish before the
deadline. Be grateful for this gift of death.

<!--It's not all about being famous, it's about being role model for a lot of
people, there are lots of famous people and celebrities--> <!--that will be
forgotten after a decade or two, but some people are remembered forever, either
for doing very good or very bad to others,--> <!--I don't think Albert Einstein,
Gandhi and Hitler will be forgotten in the near future (near as in thousand
years).--> <!--They are global role models, we want to be like some of them and
avoid being like others (okay, maybe not absolutely global, but you get it).-->
