---
layout: post
title:  "Don't chase: Become the good one"
permalink: dont-chase-become-the-good-one/
categories: life
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

When it comes to relationships, most (unsuccessful) people are _chasing_ the
good ones. They spend time trying to find their dream partner, the perfect
match, but hey, do you qualify as the dream partner of your dream partner? You
fantasize about your dream partner, but have you ever thought what kind of
partner does he/she dream of?

![I want an angel with...](/img/angel.jpg) {% include caption.html text='I want
an angel with...' %}

<!--more-->

It seems to be pretty acceptable in the society to start _looking_ for a _good_
partner once you reach a certain age (depending on the country), and that's when
people start defining for themselves what a _good_ partner means. What do they
want out of a relationship? Well, most beginners just want sex, that's one
thing, but I'm talking about real, intimate relationships. The definition
usually goes like this:

I want him/her to have
* Money
* Body
* Sense of Humor
* Empathy
* ...

Alright fine, that's a good and necessary step while thinking about a
relationship.

Now there are two groups of people after this step, let's call them Group A and
Group B.

Group A's next step is to start looking for partners, which usually follows by
installing Tinder, OkCupid and a bunch of other dating apps, spending more time
in the bar, etc. Well it makes sense to start looking for a partner at first
glance, but people in Group A are missing an important point here, they defined
what a _good partner_ means in their dictionary of life, but they haven't really
looked into their _good partner_'s dictionary to see what he/she wants out of a
relationship, because if you don't qualify her requirements, it's not a deal. 

Now there is a sub-group of Group A, too, and it includes the people who faced
with the question "am I what she dreams of?", they try to cheat and modify their
definition of a good partner, adding a line that goes "Loves me however I am",
sorry buddy, but what if I tell you she could add the same line to her
dictionary? That's not a deal, you want a good partner as you defined it, you
have to be a good partner as she defines it.

On the other hand, Group B doesn't follow the same path as Group A. Group B
starts by trying to predict what his dream partner would want out of a
relationship. Empathy? Loyalty? Knowledge? Body? They take a pen and a paper out
and write a list of what they think their dream partner would want them to have,
what would she want them to be, and they start working on those, and I bet it's
not going to be easy, knowledge doesn't pop up after a good night's sleep, you
have to spend years reading books and learning to get it. A good body doesn't
_poof_ out if you wish it to, you have to spend years being committed to
exercise and eating well, and that's not easy. After all, what you define as a
good partner ain't easy either, is it?

Now do you want your dream partner to fall for you the way you fall for her,
without having to chase her with a net? Write down a list of qualifications you
expect your dream partner to look for, and start working your ass off reaching
them, and I tell you, you will have a much easier _next step_ after this. You
won't have to chase girls hoping the 34th one doesn't reject you because "she
likes you however you are".

If I know one thing about life, it's the fact that you have to work your ass off
in order to reach your dreams, dreams aren't easy, and a deep, intimate
relationship really is a dream.
